---
layout: post
title:  "The Darkest Particles"
date:   2020-07-06 12:07:00 -0400
paper-url: https://www.scientificamerican.com/magazine/sa/2020/07-01/
paper-year: 2020
paper-authors:
  - William Charles Louis
  - Richard G. Van de Water
author: Nick Jalbert
---

Neutrinos are tiny ubiquitous particles that are generated by the fusion of
stars and other highly-energetic interactions.  They are nearly massless and
travel close to the speed of light.  We are constantly irradiated by them, but
are unaffected because they rarely interact with more familiar forms of
matter.

The standard model of physics allows for three neutrino flavors, but there
have been a number of anomalies in experimental results that suggests this is
not the whole picture.  Some physics (like the authors of this article)
suggest these anomalies point to a fourth neutrino flavor.

This fourth neutrino flavor, the *sterile neutrino*, would interact with the
universe only through gravity (and not the strong nuclear, weak nuclear, or
electromagnetic forces like other particles).

Some fun facts:

* The "dark sector" (including dark energy, dark matter, and the sterile
  neutron if it exists) accounts for 95% of the universe's energy density.

* Neutrinos oscillate through the various flavors (electron, muon, tau) as
  they travel (this discovery earned the 2015 Nobel Prize in Physics).

* Most of the experimental work seems to be attempts to measure the
  oscillations of neutrinos over varying distances from a neutrino source
  (particle accelerator, nuclear fission reactor) and then figuring out how to
  account for the observed results.

* Particle-wave duality: all particles act as both waves and marbles.  The
  wavelength of high-energy particles is shorter than low energy particles and
  this affects how it interacts with matter.

* Experimental design is crazy for this kind of work: vats with many tons of
  liquid argon, particle accelerators, etc.
