---
layout: post
title:  "Six views of embodied cognition"
date:   2020-04-03 12:03:00 -0700
paper-url: https://cogdev.sitehost.iu.edu/labwork/WilsonSixViewsofEmbodiedCog.pdf
paper-year: 2002
paper-authors:
  - Margaret Wilson
author: Nick Jalbert
---

Overview of the notion that cognitive processes are deeply rooted in the body's
interaction with the world.  Specific claims examined:

* Cognition is situated - it takes place in a real world environment and is
  inherently contextual.

* Cognition is time pressured - the limits imposed by the real-time nature of
  cognition inherently shape the process.

* We offload cognitive work onto the environment - due to resource
  limitations, we offload cognition to the environment.

* The environment is part of the cognitive system - the link between mind and
  environment is so high-bandwidth that it doesn't make sense to study the mind
  separate from the environment (note: this claim is described as "deeply
  problematic" in the abstract).

* Cognition is for action - if cognition is for controlling our biological
  body, it must be understood in the context of performing actions.

* Offline cognition is body based - because the mind evolved contextually with
  the environment, even "abstract" thought hijacks sensorimotor facilities for
  cognition.

Notes there are (at least) two schools in the philosophy of mind/cognitive
sciences: the mind is an abstract information processor and sensorimotor
inputs/outputs are peripheral.  Alternatively, brains are control systems for
biological bodies and thus sensorimotor processing is intimately tied to
cognition.

A deeper examination of the claims:

### Cognition is situated

A distinction is drawn between situated and unsituated cognition.  The former
is the cognition that happens as you do a task (e.g. hunting an animal), the
latter is the cognition that happens when you plan or daydream. These might be
variations on a theme (i.e. see the body-based cognition claim).

The author concludes that the argument that all important cognition is situated
(or rooted in situatedness) isn't strongly persuasive.  I feel a lot of this is
splitting hairs on definitions of particular technical terms.

### Cognition is time pressured

This claim is, roughly, that the time pressure involved in situated cognition
is one of the primary shaping forces of cognition.  Brains evolved to, for
example, help us flee predators as they jump out of bushes and this deeply
influences how evolution shaped our cognitive processes.

Definition: representational bottleneck - time pressure causes a bottleneck
which forces us to rely on heuristic tricks

To temper this claim, a lot of what we identify as human cognition is not
aggressively time constrained.  For example, we do some of our best,
recognizably-human work when we can sit and reflect and plan.

It is noted that spatiotemporal and movement behaviors are probably deeply
influenced by time constraints.  However, the author is unpersuaded that this
can be "scaled up" and applied usefully to all of cognition.

### We offload cognitive work to the environment

This is using the environment to work around real-time representational
bottlenecks.  This is distinct from offloading to prevent memorizing (e.g.
using a calendar) although they are sometimes conflated in the literature.

This, for example, could be moving furniture around a room to see how it looks
rather than trying to imagine how it would look.  This is also referred to as
"using the world as its own best model".

The author notes that it seems we use the environment for both time-pressured
situated tasks as well as unsituated tasks and that this may have far reaching
consequences for how we think about cognition.

### The environment is part of the cognitive system

A stronger claim than previous; if we use the environment to offload
processing then the environment should always be considered a part of
cognition.

Alternatively, directly from the paper: "The claim is this: The forces that
drive cognitive activity do not reside solely inside the head of the
individual, but instead are distributed across the individual and the situation
as they interact. Therefore, to understand cognition we must study the
situation and the situated cognizer together as a single, unified system."

The author claims that causes of cognition are undeniably environmental and
internal, but that shouldn't necessarily constrain the examination of cognition
as a modular process.  The issue ends up being "how best to carve nature at its
joints" and depends deeply on what you're studying and what you're trying to
get out of the study.

The author gives the example of hydrogen from chemistry. Before there was a
theory of an atom, much was known about how hydrogen reacts in many different
situations.  As atomic theory was developed though, so was a useful
understanding of hydrogen as something unto itself.  Both lines of research
were fertile.

### Cognition is for action

The proposal here is that memory shouldn't be viewed as a tool for recording
abstract information, but rather a tool for encoding patterns of possible
action in a 4D world.

This claim is tempered by the fact that we remember things that we cannot
directly interact with (e.g. sunsets are mentioned, even though we do look at
them).  More broadly, there is suggestion that there different types of memory.
Some are more closely coupled with action and others are more abstract.

The other tempering fact is that it seems we often build up richer
representation of objects beyond the here-and-now usefulness. For example, the
piano that is a musical instrument that becomes firewood once the blizzard
strikes.  The representations allow us to be creative when the environment
changes.

### Offline cognition is body based

The claim is that we hijack our sensorimotor tools to do other, higher-levels
of cognition. Examples include mental imagery, different types of
sensory-linked working memory, episodic memories, etc.

Excerpts from the paper's conclusion:

* "One benefit of greater specificity [of the claims around embodied cognition]
  is the ability to distinguish on-line aspects of embodied cognition from
  off-line aspects."

* In online, situated cases of cognition, "the mind can be seen as operating to
  serve the needs of a body interacting with a real-world situation."  Issues
  of time pressure may come into play.  We should be careful, however, in
  scaling up the processes that come into play to explain all of cognition.


* In offline, unsituated forms of cognition, "rather than the mind operating to
  serve the body, we find the body (or its control systems) serving the mind.
  This takeover by the mind, and the concomitant ability to mentally represent
  what is distant in time or space, may have been one of the driving forces
  behind the runaway train of human intelligence that separated us from other
  hominids."

**THOUGHTS**: a decent survey of the field, gives good high-level pointers.
Sometimes a little overly-hair-splitting when it comes to definitions.
